[Music]
hello everyone I'm Dr David pretter
welcome again to the empowering
neurologist on our program today we're
going to talk about cancer and you know
truth be known we're not making a whole
lot of progress in uh dealing with
cancer cancer rates continue to climb by
and large we're going to be talking to
Dr Thomas Saed who's the author of this
incredible book uh called cancer as a
metabolic disease Dr safreed writes
about how cancer may represent a
manifestation of changes in what are
called the mitochondria those small uh
energy producing particles that live
within each of our cells let me tell you
a little bit about Dr safreed he
received his PhD in genetics and
biochemistry from the University of
Illinois he also holds a master's degree
in genetics from Illinois State
University he was a post-doctoral fellow
in the Department of Neurology at Yale
University School of Medicine and then
served on the faculty as an assistant
professor of Neurology uh again at Yale
prior to receiving a uh full
professorship Dr safreed was an
associate professor in the department of
biology at Boston College uh he has had
a variety of uh honors and awards over
the year from such diverse organizations
as the American Oil chemist Society the
National Institute of Health uh the
American Society for uh neurochemistry
and the ketogenic diet special interest
group of the American epilepsy Society
Dr safe Reed has previously chaired the
scientific advisory committee for the
national TX and Allied diseases
Association and he presently serves on
several editorial Boards of well respes
Ed uh scientific journals including
nutrition and Metabolism uh
neurochemical research and the Journal
of lipid research his research program
right now focuses on Gene environmental
interactions how our genome interacts
with various environmental influences uh
to cause disease and to threaten our
health uh he has special interest in
things like epilepsy autism and bra
cancer uh as well as other
neurodegenerative conditions Dr safreed
investigates many of these diseases from
the perspective of genetics but also
from the interplay between our genetics
and energy metabolism much of his work
also has direct translational benefit to
the clinic meaning a direct
applicability for doctors who are
actually treating patients so I'm real
excited about today's interview let's
get started
well uh as I mentioned in the intro I'm
very excited to chat with you today Dr
safreed and uh welcome to the program
well thank you very much it's a it's a
pleasure to be here well I'd like to
start off uh you know you've dedicated
your uh life at least as of late uh to
looking at things like epilepsy tasac
some neurodegenerative conditions
ganglios uh events but I think what's
really gotten a lot of people's
attention is the contention that you
have with reference to the underlying
cause and possible way out of this real
mess that we seem to be in as it relates
to cancer and again just for everyone's
uh benefit there is this um I think a
landmark book that healthc care
practitioners need to have in their
bookshelves so first maybe an overview
as to what is the conventional approach
today to dealing with cancer
well um it hasn't really changed much in
the last I don't know maybe 50 years um
basically there's a diagnosis um a
biopsy if you will or some image uh that
will indicate uh something might be
wrong um and then based on on on a
hystological preparation a decision is
made as to whether this might appear to
be benign or say um um more aggressive
malignant if you will um and then a
decision is made as to what might be the
best course of action to to attempt to
manage the disease and um you know most
of the minor cancers can be easily
managed with a surgical reection uh if
it's shown that this is not um a
malignancy um and uh and the and the
case is closed okay so many many people
who so-call might have considered
themselves having can can um basically
have a benign lesion of some sort and
it's easily resolved uh the issues come
when there's some um consideration that
maybe there's something going on here
the number of mitotic figures what the
what the cells might look like to the to
the Professional pathologist's Eye and
then uh a decision is made a decision is
made to perhaps be a little bit more
aggressive so not only do we have the
surgical reection not always depending
on the kind of tumor it is but then this
could be followed by a series of
recommended
chemotherapies uh followed by uh either
radiation chemo sometimes a combination
of both um most of our work has been
done in in brain cancer so that's a
pretty uh established procedure the
individual would be presenting uh with
some sort of a neurological problem of
one form or another or a limb that's not
working properly uh a scan of the brain
is shown to have some sort of lesion um
often times depending on the on the
image that you get from various uh
scanning procedures a decision is made
to either immediately resect this tumor
or uh possibly have some watchful
waiting period the problem of course is
in in in going into these tumors uh
especially in brain um you you provoke
the micro environment by the very
surgical reection that you do um which
often leads to then a dissemination of
tumor cells
uh that are in other words the horse the
bees are out of the hive the horse is
out of the BN the very the very Act of
disturbing the micro environment can
precipitate a more aggressive uh
situation yet this is what is is
generally done um and then this is a
followed of course by a series of
radiation and
chemo Taz olomide often in conjunction
with dexamethasone a steroid uh this off
often dexamethasone can be given to
other cancer patients to improve their
appetite uh when they're sick from some
of the chemo the latest the latest um um
idea is the
immunotherapies uh which are more or
less just simply an extension of the
kind of chemotherapies that are already
uh being used they seem to focus a
little bit more on our immune systems
ability to try to kill the tumor cells
um but but in in a sense they're they're
they're not much different either in the
uh uh in in their therapeutic
Effectiveness uh or in uh the kinds of
of adverse effects they they produce um
so we're we're still dealing uh with a
problem and the problem in my mind stems
from the fact that that the majority of
of of therapies that we use today are
based on the idea that cancer is a
genetic disease uh and these genes cause
a um destabilization of cell
proliferation so many of the
chemotherapies that are used are very
toxic to try to stop DNA
replication uh so and this obvious leads
to hair loss and a variety of other uh
maladies that are affecting any kind of
a proliferative proliferating cell in
our body whether it's tumorogenic or not
so we suffer a lot of these indirect
adverse effects um from the very
therapies that are used uh to try to
manage the disease now of course many of
these therapies do in fact uh C cause a
resolution of the disease provided it in
most cases as long as it's not a stage
three or stage four condition which the
most aggressive you know many of the
chemos radiation and and surgeries that
we use um are uh corrective uh there's
you know thousands millions of people
that have been treated with cancer that
seem to be doing okay the pro the
problem is we've put these people now at
risk uh for a variety of other ailments
uh uh that they uh that they have as the
result of being treated for the for the
disease that they had but this is
there's a new branch of medicine called
cancer survival medicine so we have a a
whole range of different uh neurological
um gastrointestinal cardiovascular
problems that occur uh month years
perhaps 10 20 years after uh which then
um overall lead to um uh other kinds of
problems uh reducing the quality of life
in one way or the other so we have a
problem here we're not we're not we're
not using therapies that are that are
very effective that can enhance quality
of life and improve overall survival and
uh we know about these therapies they're
there they're being used successfully
but not in mainstream medicine and
that's that's where we think uh viewing
the disease as a metabolic disease will
uh eliminate a lot of the problems that
we are currently experiencing in the
cancer field at this time so your work
is really an outgrowth of the pioneering
work of Otto warberg back in the uh 1900
unds a work for which he ultimately in
1931 was awarded the Nobel Prize and Dr
warberg really felt uh similarly that
this was an issue caused by changes in
the functionality of mitochondria that
ultimately caused uh these mitochondria
to shift their metabolism away uh I mean
to doing what's called aerobic
glycolysis
fermentation which is not uh you know
it's a situation that's associated with
increased inflam increased free radical
production ultimately a further DNA
damage of the mitochondria themselves
and probably secondarily damage to the
nuclear DNA as well so this was the work
and you must have seized upon this work
and had an epiphany one day and how did
that affect you well um it didn't come
uh when I first started a lot of the
work that we were doing um I mean only I
only heard of warberg name uh didn't
really understand uh what he had done
because every textbook discusses warberg
biochemistry you know he was the
preeminent biochemist of the 20th
century right um and he had done a lot
of uh things and you hear warberg you
know in glycolysis and lactic acid
fermentation and and these kinds of
things and respiration but it wasn't
didn't connect with us until we started
to uh use as as a matter of fact we were
given a drug uh an anti-ganglioside
synthesis inhibitor that seemed to work
um really well in stopping tumor growth
and of course the the company got very
excited about this but then when we did
all the appropriate controls we found
this drug was working really well but
when we did the appropriate controls it
turned out that the drug was was
interfering with the um digestion of
foods that were eaten so it was like an
indirect calorie restriction so then
when we put in the control experiments
with the mice that were fed to match the
body weight of the drug treated animals
the tumor reduction was the same there
was absolutely no difference between so
this opened our eyes to say whoa this
calorie restriction is very powerful and
we did a lot of studies on this and then
we began to ask you know what is the
mechanism by which calorie restriction
shrinks tumors and it became clear they
lower blood sugar and they elevate
ketones and this links directly to
warberg Central theory that the cells
need need glucose and the answer is the
question is what um um how is it
possible that these tumor cells need so
much glucose and warberg uh key uh
contribution was showing that the
respiratory system of the cell is
damaged and if the cell is going to live
it has to engage alternative sources of
energy and the most primitive source of
energy we know on the planet is
fermentation energy and uh aerobic
fermentation or they say aerobic
glycolysis is simply a reversion back to
the situation that existed on the planet
for all organisms before oxygen came
into the environment back then couple of
2.5 billion years ago all the organisms
on the planet at that time were
fermenters so this is an heirloom uh
that has now become uh reinvigorated in
these tumor cells so and then it became
clear that they ferment uh two major
fuels glucose and glutamine and
glutamine is metabolized to glutamate
which then generates Ates tremendous
energy uh from TCA cycle uh fermentation
it's a different kind of energy uh it's
an ancient energy pathway just like in
the cytoplasm is glycolysis so these
tumor cells are simply reverting back to
the way all organisms existed on the
planet before oxygen so one has to
Simply ask what kept those cells alive
and what what did they do they fermented
okay what did they ferment they ferment
glucose and glutamine what happens when
you deprive tumor cells of glucose and
glutamine they die so the the unique
thing that warberg didn't know he didn't
know substrate level phosphorilation in
the TCA cycle and he didn't know that
that ketones could not be fermented or
if he did he didn't he didn't write much
about it so what we simply do is prepare
patients or mice and we transition their
whole body over to a uh to high ketones
and low glucose which is done through
ketogenic diets this prepares the body
for for the various drugs and procedures
that work
synergistically uh with the diet the
diet alone will not resolve cancer in
most patients however when it is used
with specific drugs and procedures it's
unbelievably powerful and it's only when
you put these together that you get this
in Synergy which can Target and kill
tumor cells without toxicity and this is
the nice thing you you just said
something I think that's really very
important for our viewers actually
several things and that is that you're
not proposing that this ketogenic
approach is going to cure all cancers by
any means but is used along with as an
adjunct sort of in a systems approach uh
and our viewers have seen that before as
uh the Dr Dale brison's approach for
example to alzheimer's that multiple uh
ideas are utilized to create the most
favorable environment uh for dealing
with a situation so again to simplify
then for our viewers what you're saying
is that the cancer cells basically are
going to uh require sugar for they don't
have the ability to utilize these fat
derivatives these ketones um as a fuel
source as opposed to our normal
non-cancer cells which can use these
ketones as fuel sources and you're
exploiting that by basically depriving
these cancer cells of what they need I.E
sugar and and carbohydrate derived fuels
yeah yes yes and it works beautifully uh
I've seen spectacular results in fact it
works much better in humans than it does
in the mice um you know we we were very
excited to see how powerful these
approaches were in the animal models but
we have yet to cure a mouse uh of
metastatic uh cancer or gleo blastoma
you know some people will say oh they
cure cancer and mice all the time not
not the mice that have the same kinds of
cancers as humans have I can tell you
that well just for our uh viewers I'd
like to uh call just recommend that you
consider uh Googling on um The
Huffington Post an article I wrote
summarizing Dr saf's work several years
ago uh that dealt with the several of
your case p uh published cases dealing
with glol blasto a very challenging a
type of brain cancer extremely
aggressive but by using again this
ketogenic approach as an adjunct as an
add-on therapy and again you know our
our viewers watching this are pretty
well uh clued in to other uh upsides of
being more ketogenic and reducing their
carbohydrate intake so uh thereafter
Where Do We Stand then in terms of
mechanistically what are we doing to
these mitochondria these energy
producers when we are feeding them
ketones as opposed to uh having them
shifted to just utilizing glucose or
glutamine well um the ketones uh uh
cause uh metabolic stress in the in the
mitochondria of the tumor
cell um but they enhance the MIT the
metabolic efficiency in normal cells so
um you know one of the things when when
they say cancer cells are drug resistant
and and radiation resistant and they
have this capability those those resist
that resistance in those tumor cells is
the result of their fermentation
Pathways so both glucose and glutamine
increase dramatically GL glutathione the
antioxidant capability in those tumor
cells so the tumor cells are resistant
to many chemotherapeutic drugs and
radiation because they're fermenting
like crazy so if you're going to make
them vulnerable to these kinds of
therapies you have to you have to remove
the fermentation shield and you do that
by by uh gradually removing glucose and
gradually removing glutamine which now
puts these tumor cells at incredible uh
uh vulnerability to a little bit of
elevation in oxygen and the ketones will
will uh will facilitate that but so will
hyperbaric oxygen so if you just going
to ask you that you see hyperbaric
oxygen alone like the diet alone is not
likely to have major therapeutic benefit
to patients all right but when you
prepare the patient metabolically and
then use hyperbaric oxygen together with
drugs that put a little bit more
restriction on glucose and glutamine the
results are unbelievable I mean these
tumor cells are just decimated and uh it
works remarkably well in humans seen
data in humans now uh from uh Egypt and
turkey where they're where they're less
restricted in the way they treat cancer
patients with spectacular results on
stage a variety of stage four cancers
using minimal amounts of chemotherapy
together with ketogenic diets and
hyperbaric oxygen and a few drugs like 2
de oxy glucose and some of these that
work together and and the results are
are almost incomprehensibly good I I I
don't think once this once this becomes
known
I think I think it's going to be Earth
shattering uh it's just that it's just
that people always ask where are the
clinical trials to do this where is the
evidence-based medicine to support what
we're saying and the the issue is here
of course is clinical trials are are are
are double blind crossovers to look for
a singular drug on a particular problem
exactly we have to change that because
because the way we use um metabolic
therapy is a combination of drugs diets
and procedures that are dosed um and and
strategically used in scheduling and
timing and all of this varies depending
on the individual so one shoe does not
fit all so this has our our view of how
we manage the disease has to be Chang
dramatically to incorporate this new way
of managing cancer I want to just go
back for a moment to our discussion on
uh treating patients with this brain t
uh cancer gly blastoma and uh in one of
your case reports uh you you mentioned
how one of the individuals was treated
with steroids with
dexamethasone and uh interestingly one
of the things that we as clinicians see
commonly when patients are given
steroids like Decadron or dexamethasone
is their blood sugars go up yeah so uh
you know in that regard then while
you're acutely reducing inflammation and
you look at the repeat MRI scan and you
see oh the tumor looks smaller the
degree of inflammation surrounding that
tumor looks reduced we must be making
progress uh the reality is based upon
your thesis that giving a drug that may
very well increase uh sug glucose
availability might be absolutely doing
more harm than good in the long run yes
well we've written about that um um
often and uh just recently within the
last year the work from the group from
uh stoop and colleagues who actually
write the standard of care for gleo
blastoma worldwide have now come out
with a paper uh urging caution in using
steroids for people with brain cancer uh
gleo blastoma and other cancers for the
very reasons that I've mentioned it does
a lot of damage in other ways to facilit
actually uh it gives you false
information about the success if you
have a patient who has a brain tumor and
that tumor is growing and it has a lot
of Edema it generally will press on some
region of the brain uh causing some
maybe paralysis in the face the arm or
the leg and when you administer the
dexamethasone uh you reduce the edema
and it makes it the patient feel like
there's a miraculous change in the tumor
and everybody's happy and feeling
confident but in reality it's a fian uh
maneuver oh it's terrible because
everybody oh look at I'm feeling good
now you know the the the various things
but but the problem is is that you've
reduced edema uh but you're also
increasing the rate at which the tumor
cells are growing right and uh you know
despite the fact that we've been saying
this for a number of years that
dexamethasone should not be used against
brain cancer patients uh for the most
part um and the recent paper coming out
from Stoops group who leads who who
defines the standard of care you can go
into any neurooncology clinic today in
the top hospitals and they are using
huge doses of dexamethasone to treat
their patients it's uncons
I don't know if they don't read the
literature they're unfamiliar with the
metabolism I I just don't understand it
I think it goes right back to the
short-term gains clinical Improvement as
measured subjectively and objectively by
performance uh and like you say people
suddenly feel better they regain
function and everybody's happy and that
is really shortlived uh you know that
that sort of improvement and then the
back end of the hurricane comes around
um I want I want to go back to the the
notion
there's one more thing I'd like to say
about the standard of care for for gleo
blastoma and it's not just the uh using
of the dexamethasone and elevating blood
sugar it's also the fact that when you
irradiate the brain you create a
tremendous amount of necrosis which then
frees up the glutamine and the glutamine
now becomes a prime Fuel and when you
put glucose and glutamine together in
the micro environment you send up a a
The Perfect Storm of adverse effects
that will lead to the rapid growth of
the tumor and the demise of the patient
um everybody knows this is pallative
anyway so it's not most it's this the
standard of care for gleo blastoma is
not considered Curative but the but the
problem is so many patients think it is
and uh it's a real tragedy of monumental
proportions to think that we are we are
treating people with procedures that are
going to create an environment that's
going to lead to the rapid growth and
their demise and then we throw in the
toxic drug timide which is often used
together with the radiation and this
creates more necrosis more problems um
and now recent paper showed that the Taz
olomide increases so-called driver
genetic mutations which make no sense at
all yet you have a little bit of an
increase in overall in progression free
survival not overall survival so the
whole concept of how we're treating
brain cancer is is upside down it's it's
not it's not right and uh and and the
results are clearly in the survival
statistics which are abysmal but those
abysmal survival statistics are directly
the result of the treatments that we're
using I know so many patients who have
abandoned the standard of care who are
using metabolic therapy and are doing so
much better and problem is oh where are
the clinical trials for this well who's
going to do this yes what hospital is
going to say we are going to abandon
radiation and chemo and do metabolic
therapy well beyond that who's going to
underwrite those studies yeah that's
another issue that's another issue yeah
and and you know just to be very clear
about it for our viewers that is uh that
studies are underwritten by people who
develop these uh monotherapies or these
drugs uh in the hopes that they are
successful and hence their product will
be the standard of care uh I want to go
back to your contention uh that this is
ultimately cancer in general is
ultimately a mitochondriopathy it is an
acquired mitochondriopathy and we've
been talking about that in terms of
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's for quite
some time but it is an acquired failure
or disruption of the way that
mitochondria are involved in energy
production that said first walk us
through that and then secondly let's
talk about this notion of mitochondrial
therapy as sort of being uh the the
moniker under which your program takes
its support yeah well first of all um uh
Albert sorgi also a Nobel laurate um
back in the uh 1979 published a very
interesting paper and proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences describing
what he referred to as the oncogenic
Paradox uh the Paradox basically said
How is it possible that all these
so-called provocative disperate Agents
from the environment or some rare
inherited mutations might produce cancer
through a common pathophysiological
mechanism and this was an enigma as it
was it's a paradox you know some people
got cancer from being exposed to
cigarette smoke other people got cancer
from uh um you know from being exposed
to a chemical carcinogen some people got
cancer from being exposed to radiation I
mean it was like many different Origins
uh on on the surface but what um what
was common to all of these and that's
what we I put together in the book for
the first time was that um they all of
these impact uh either directly or
indirectly uh on the mitochondria so you
have inherited gene mutations that that
increase your risk for cancer but the
products of those gene mutations damage
the respiration every one of the
provocative agents in the Paradox in one
way or another will damage the
respiration but not too acutely it's a
chronic progressive damage to the rad to
the respiration and in order to survive
the cell has to uh upregulate a more
primitive uh form of energy so what what
happens is once the mitochondria in a
particular population of cells in a
particular organ in a given patient
those cells signal that mitochondria
signal with a very sophisticated
biochemical procedure mechanism the
nucleus and and the nucleus responds by
upregulating genes that turn on
fermentation Pathways so if the cell
cannot ferment it can never become a
tumor because all tumor cells are
fermentors so we have certain cells in
our bodies like neurons in the brain
they can't ferment so when you take away
their respiratory capacity they either
die or they shrivel up or they have
these problems so you don't get tumors
very often from neurons you get tumors
in the brain from gal cells and G cells
or even heart uh cells don't muscle
cells if you have a if you have cells
with a lot of mitochondria and you
damage the respiration those cells often
die they don't usually become tumors but
on liver kidney spleen bladder and
breast and lung you know you have those
cells have a capacity to ferment when
respiration is damaged so those cells
can go on and form tumor so you you have
to have cells that when respiration is
chronically damaged the cell has the
capacity to upregulate fermentation and
in that process there's a there's a a
vicious cycle where mitochondria become
more damaged leading to reactive oxygen
species which then as you said damage
the nucleus causing the gene mutations
which are largely red herrings so
majority of the cancer field is focused
on red herrings they are the effects
they are not the cause of the problem
the cause of the problem is the damage
to the respiration which then leads to a
cascading series of events which most
people are focusing on enogen and tumor
suppressor genes you know the mut the
the somatic mutations are simply an
effect of Ross damage enogen turn on are
transcription factors that upregulate
fermentation so if the cell is going to
survive it's going to need fermentation
it's a it's inefficient so you need more
glucose trans Porters you need more
glutamine Transporters you need all the
things that that cell is going to need
to ferment and that's what the enogen
are doing but they're an effect they're
not the cause there's a mechanism at
least uh with respect to neurons whereby
when there are deficiencies of
mitochondrial function compromised
energy production uh and ultimately
changes in the transmembrane electro uh
potential that through transmembrane
cytochrome C caspace enzymes are
activated ultimately apotosis is
initiated but I guess there's a balance
here between that which would then be
positive shutting that cell down uh
versus proliferation and might that be
then the nuclear DNA modification that
then uh allows this to propagate you
mean the proliferation aspect yes no
it's the fermentation so the initiation
of fermentation then allows it to bypass
the fact that this is a mitochondrial
dysfunction well because the
mitochondria as you said it control
apotosis the M mitochondria have control
the kill switch in the cell yes so when
mitochondria would Rec cytochrom uh C
and uh and initiate the the apototic
Cascade that's that's the result of a of
a generally functional mitochondria um
but if you have cells that have
defective mitochondria therefore the
kill switch doesn't work and the cells
are now already in this fermentation
pathway and it was shown by son and
shinado at tups University that the
default state of cells is proliferation
so what's keeping the diff the cell in a
differentiated state is the function of
the respiration system which is the
mitochondria so when that becomes
damaged the cell falls back on its
default state which is proliferation and
yet we have this mechanism whereby
defective mitochondria are eliminated
through autophagy or mitophagy where
they self- select uh for their own
demise why does that fail and and if
that's the case what can we do to
enhance autop you or the the Nature's
way of getting rid of those defective
mitochondria well that now uh impacts on
the on the concept of prevention this is
different than once the tumor has
already uh established and is now
invading and growing and I'll talk about
the nature of met metastasis uh in a bit
but um to protect and know you can't in
my mind you can't get cancer if your
mitochondria healthy so healthy
mitochondria if the if the origin of the
disease is mitochondrial respiratory
damage and you do certain um fasting and
various certain diets that maintain the
health and vitality of the body it's
very unlikely that you will get cancer
so maintaining uh healthy mitochondria
and as I said therapeutic fasting uh
reduces blood sugar increases ketones
and uh facilitates autophagy uh for
failing mitochondria and what happens is
the those mitochondria that don't work
properly are phagocytosed inside the
cell it's actually a lysosomal fusion
and they are the fuels of that
mitochondria are then redistributed to
the rest of the cell so that's well and
good for people who are interested in
preventing cancer I would say the vast
majority of people are more interested
in what are you going to do for me after
I have the disease because we know how
to prevent cancer and warberg knew how
to do that cancer is most cancer are
almost completely prevented if you
follow uh these kinds of things even if
you are in fact exposed to some uh toxic
uh carcinogens in the environment uh if
you can maintain healthy mitochondrial
function you reduce significantly the
risk even even those inherited mutations
it's another very interesting thing like
braco one that you hear about the Leaf
real many p53 mutations none of those
mutations are 100% uh uh penetrant we
know braco one is like what 40%
penetrate mean 60% of the people that
have the mutation never develop the
disease so there it can't be the primary
cause it's got to be a secondary cause
because what only in the patients where
you braco one causes cancer do you see
the fermentation phenotype same with
Leaf manyi the p-53 there's 20% of
people who have p-53 mutations never get
cancer so because they never damage
never cause the the the irreversible
damage or the the the the damage to the
respiration so prevention is keep your
mitochondrial healthy uh management is
how you starve the tumor cell of its
fermentable fuels and this both can be
done both of these processes can be done
and the autophagy process plays a much
greater role in prevention or in the
early stages of the tumor because if the
tumor reaches a a very aggressive State
there's very few mitochondria left in
the tumor cell to resurrect so it's it
has to be killed outright you can
uh re-educate a tumor cell to enter back
into the Society of cells if its
respiratory system is is compromised to
a certain extent let me uh just take
have our viewers take a breath here and
recognize uh that you heard a lot of
similarities just now between what Dr
safreed was talking about and what our
discussions have been over the past
several years in terms of approaches for
brain health in general that we are
trying to shift metabolism to a state of
low oxidative stress of of less creation
of both inflammation and these damaging
reactive oxygen and nitrogen species
that said the damaging effects of the uh
perturbed mitochondrial function in the
creation then of these enhanced free
radicals is a nuclear event affecting
nuclear components protein fat and most
importantly DNA but your contention is
that cancer is not a nuclear event uh
but that uh that's seems to be where all
the research is is looking at nuclear
DNA and nuclear issues right and most of
it is secondary and and the and the
strongest evidence for that are the
nuclear transfer experiments which I
bundled up for the very first time they
have always been present in the
literature over decades they were just
what was what was considered anomalies
um they they were not dealt seriously
and people people um felt very
uncomfortable they didn't want to deal
with it because it wasn't consistent
with the nuclear problem that cancer is
a genetic disease
and this was done by a number of
distinguished the best developmental
biologists that that were present and
still are present in the field taking
the nucleus out of a tumor cell that has
the so-called driver mutations and and
somatic mutations and all the genetic
so-called defects and and having the
cell growing uh growing out of control
and you take that nucleus and now put it
into a new cytoplasm and you can develop
new tissues and new organisms uh from
the nucleus of the tumor cell that's
that contains supposedly contains the
origin of the disease and what happens
is usually those nuclei those tumor
nuclei abort development but they do not
cause the cancer they do not cause the
prime phenotype what we seen in
Alzheimer's uh similar experiments but
with transfer of mitochondria we do
develop uh the Alzheimer's uh model in
rodents that have received mitochondrial
transplantation from uh those uh that
are genetically predisposed to getting
alzhe dises so that is exactly
supportive of your contention using the
Alzheimer's metaphor yeah I and I think
you know without one of the what the NCI
had uh a few years ago I don't know if
they still do they had these provocative
questions that were supposed to Define
cancer research for the rest of this
century and you know one of the
provocative questions is is how come
people with Alzheimer's disease are at
lower risk for for cancer in general and
uh what we now know about Alzheimer's
disease it's a hypometabolic disorder
it's a it's a it's a global energy
problem and um uh there's fewer glucose
Transporters glucose metabolism is
reduced in the brains and in the system
of these just just so happens that the
brain the neurons are more vulnerable
than other cells in the in the system
you you're not going to be able to
generate a tumor if the very if the very
uh structures needed to bring
fermentable fuels into the cell are are
are diminished and that's one of the one
of the connections between the lack of
the reduced risk for cancer in patients
that have Alzheimer's that was one of
the provocative questions and neurons as
I said they shrivel up so um the neurons
are suffering uh because they can't they
can't ferment in in a in a in a in a in
a in a consistent way so they're going
to be um energy starved essentially uh
uh they're they're and this is why
ketones uh by the work of Richard V and
a number of other uh they're using
they're using Ketone Esters to prevent
the degeneration of neurons and
Alzheimer's disease and this is a almost
the inverse of what cancer is it's a
it's a hypometabolic rather than a hyper
metabolic system so for our viewers I
would refer back to the interview that
we did uh with Dr Mary Newport and also
the work of Dr Mark Matson and Dr
Richard Beach as well that we've we've
quoted many times so um what I think I
hear you saying is by and large the best
diet to be on is one that favors the
body's production of ketones in other
words a a higher fat lower carb diet I I
think it's I think it's uh good for do
people to do that periodically uh I'm
not saying you know Mediterranean diets
there's so many diets that are really
quite healthy for the body um but if one
were to be overly concerned about their
risk for cancer suppose they have a
family history or whatever um
therapeutic fasting which is just water
only for for several days then
transitioned into a uh a more ketotic
State like Bulletproof Coffee or or
avocados or you what you do is you
maintain and the consistent uh low
Baseline glucose and keep elevating the
ketones and that and that increases the
Delta G Prime of ATP hydris it's a very
it's a very sophisticated but
complicated system that uh that do vich
has has clearly shown um you you produce
much fewer oxygen radicals but you
enhance the health and vitality of the
mitochondria you don't need to do this
all the time I I think people sometimes
fear that oh the rest of my life I have
to spend eating avocados and fasting or
or something along these lines or eating
butter or whatever and that's not true I
I I think um I I think people just have
to be cognizant of what they need to do
periodically to uh restructure and
regain the health of their mitochondria
to prevent uh a variety of different
diseases that are linked to energy
energy defects so then a periodic uh
fast followed by introduction of MCT oil
coconut oil other good fats uh would
allow us to enhance autophagy get rid of
those defective mitochondria really
basically clean house and then hit the
reset button yes exact exactly and I and
that was part of chapter 19 in my book
uh where I called it um um uh autolytic
cannibalism it's basically a way that
bodies uh go after the
inefficient the inefficient cells and
and then they they they they um fze them
um and they just redistribute the the
nutrients to the rest of the cells in
our body so we're re we're re
rejuvenating because don't forget uh
death is simply entropy which is
disorder and um and what maintains uh
what we can never stop this we can just
simply delay it all right we can either
accelerate entropy or we can delay
entropy tropy and entropy resides in the
energetic efficiency of our respiratory
system as we age our respiratory system
goes down and a lot of cells uh die and
we we get old and we die but that's
simply uh uh the the the concept of the
second law of Thermodynamics which is
which is entropy so by keeping your
mitochondria and Energy Efficiency you
will delay uh entropy that's basically
what we can do we can never prevent it
because that's the the second law but we
can certainly delay it and these
therapeutic fasts and these kinds of
things are simply a way to delay entropy
reduce the risk for Alzheimer's disease
and a variety of these other various
chronic diseases type two diabetes I
mean when you think about it they're all
related together they they all put
stress on the on the efficiency of our
Energy System some people get cancer
because the the hypoxic uh cause of that
leads to a an upregulation of
fermentation in the cyclic event other
people could get Alzheimer's some people
get type two diabetes whatever it is
it's it's generally the uh impact of of
a lifestyle and uh diets on the
efficiency of our energetic system
leading to a variety of of maladies uh
which represent probably you you know
better than me maybe 80% of all the
afflictions we have in this country are
in one way or another uh related to one
of these disturbances in energy ballot
well you know according to the World
Health Organization this is now these
types of diseases the number one cause
of death on the planet and you know we
live in a world of uh where it people
are trying to um just uh look at
everything through a very microscopic
lens of specialization when some of us
like yourself are taking a step back and
looking at the broad picture what are
the underlying common mechanisms here
that seem to be at play involving things
like cancer and chronic degenerative
conditions including Alzheimer's
coronary AR disease type 2 diabetes and
even some of the other inflammator
condition so I think interestingly uh
from a historical perspective what you
are discussing and what we've talked
about is really getting uh our
physiology uh back to a place where it
was prior to this bombardment of our
bodies with sugar and other forms of
carbohydrate you know truthfully we've
never had access to Sugar certainly like
we have now and we sought out uh fat as
a concentrated source of calories though
we didn't understand that during our
periods of hunting and Gathering often
times having to fast by necessity uh put
upon us for who knows how long days at a
time so you know this is likely the
condition of the human for uh
99.6% of our time on this planet and you
know our microbiome adapted to that our
our um mitochondria adapted to that and
suddenly we've turned the tables in
terms of food representing information
and look at what's happening around us
it's no surprise yeah and I I don't
think we're ever going to going to
change that um that all we have to do is
become aware of it and I I think um if
we know what to do uh we can at least
take charge take a little bit of charge
and control over over over the the
system the food industry you know has
specialized in producing producing foods
that are unbelievably tasty uh uh
depleted in nutrition but remarkably
tasting because all we've always
struggled to have things sweet I mean we
would have to wait for seasonal ripes
ripening of berries and and things like
this and then we would get very excited
but it was only temporary now we have it
uh 247 any any any Supermarket will
provide you with that same level of
pleasure um but you know so so we know
per if we can just periodically set take
a step back and say okay uh I I I'm I'm
not going to deprive myself of a big
pizza every now and then but you know
everybody or whatever what pleases
someone but at least you know what you
can do uh to occasionally uh re
reconfigure your your energy metabolism
um we we we published a paper showing
the glucose Ketone index calculator and
I was kind of surprised uh it was for
cancer patients basically but I was
surprised that how many um people who
are interested in just General Health
have embraced this this C calcor what it
does is it it measures the level of the
ratio of blood glucose to blood ketones
and basically when you are
therapeutically fasting you have a very
low glucose Ketone index below one which
means that there's more Ketone
circulating in your bloodstream than
there is glucose on a molar on a on a on
a regular concentration and people
experience all these you know Wonderful
Health uh it's like therapeutic fasting
ketogenic diets people look to see how
their their index is and I and see many
of these athletes U Elite athletes and
various health health guys Health gurus
and all these kinds of people they're
all uh many of them are discussing this
um their index what's their index and
it's a way of knowing how healthy you
are at a particular period of time now
we can't stay in those Health zones
forever but every now and then it's good
to enter them and hang out there for a
short period of time and then go back
into the regular environment but what's
the short period of time well I would
say that if you can get your index in
the range of close to 1.0 or below um
you know for like three to four to five
days um I think you're doing remarkable
benefit uh health benefits to your body
this is the situation where you're going
to now uh enhance the health and
vitality of your mitochondria in the
cells of your body so you'll be reducing
oxygen-free radicals uh using autophagy
to to remove uh those those uh cellular
components that are not effici efficient
uh even removing some cells that are not
efficient because they'll be fagos by
our immune system so so um but at least
you have a guideline uh because people
didn't know in the past there was no
biomarker that you could look at and say
oh what's your index if you have an
index 1.0 or below you know you're in a
state of therapeutic ketosis and you
know that your body is now in a healing
mode and uh you're going to know that
this and how long you want to stay in
that in that zone is up to you but at
least you say you know there's some
people who check who checked our stuff
um and they did a five-day water only
fast and they showed that exactly as we
published they remained in these zones
and then they go beyond that they
started doing 10 days and this kind of
stuff I mean the human the human is an
addictive they seem to go to extremes
uncertain of these I never say you know
do a 25 day fast or something but some
people do this I and and they're always
trying to keep as long as they can in
these zones and you know we always go
overboard you in the in some of these
things but you don't have to I mean it's
just you know dovetail the experience in
with a religious experience a retreat I
don't people can do this however way
they want to do it but they don't have
to feel that they they have to do this
you know for long periods of time it's
just very interesting it's human it's
the human
nature well let me thank you for sharing
your time with us today this has been
incredibly powerful information and uh I
know that uh people who are watching
this are really going to get a lot out
of it and again
uh this is a this is a book for every
Healthcare practitioner needs to be on
your shelf so thanks so much for for
being with us today I just want to say
one more thing uh Travis Christopherson
has written a book called uh um tripping
over the truth uh the metabolic theory
of cancer and it was based on my book
and it's it's written more for the lay
person you know my book is written for
the the not only the lay person but the
scientist engaged in the field but I
think Travis's book um is really
exploding the on the on the various
bookstores and things like this well
that's a great plug in the name of the
book is tripping on the truth tripping
over the truth tripping over the truth
okay we'll see if we can add that into
the blog that will accompany uh this
video we'll put a link to that that's
that's terrific okay okay well we'll
talk soon thank you again okay thank you
all right by bye bye
now what a terrific uh person what an
amazing researcher who has dedicated his
life to really looking at things in a
different way and he's making such
incredibly uh good progress in really
trying to re educate Us in terms of the
Paradigm uh underlying cancer as a
generality and I think it's good to take
a step back oftentimes and look at the
broad Strokes uh that may be involved
here again here is his book cancer as a
metabolic disease uh this I I think is
uh really one of the foundational books
uh at least for healthc care
practitioners that really should be a
part of your reading list thanks for
joining us today I'm Dr David PR
[Music]